Pag. 1/3

Sessione suppletiva 2015
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
SI96 – ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzo: IT04, EA07 – TURISMO
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE

PART 1: Reading Comprehension
Dorset's cultural landscape: Hardy country and Broadchurch breaks
With a new Hollywood take on 'Far from the Madding Crowd' about to show the world its charms,
now is the time to escape to this stunning coastal county, says Lucy Gillmore
The postcard-pretty county of Dorset, for years in the shadow of bolder, blowsier summer hotspots
Devon and Cornwall, is currently basking in the spotlight. And it's largely down to a television
show. Those in the know, of course, have been summering here for years, but for others, cult crime
drama Broadchurch – set on the Dorset coast – was an eye-opener.
5

10

15

20

Now, keeping the momentum going, is a new film adaptation of Thomas Hardy's novel, Far from
the Madding Crowd, which hits cinema screens next Friday. Starring Carey Mulligan and with a
script by David Nicholls (of One Day fame), it highlights the county's bucolic interior.
Hardy, Dorset's most renowned writer, showcases his home county's charms in many of his novels.
However, he chooses to disguise place names, or in some cases use ancient nomenclature: Dorset
becomes Wessex, while Casterbridge is a thinly disguised Dorchester. In 1913, he worked on a
Hardy's Wessex guidebook, which revealed the real sites on which the locations in his novels are
based.
The Dorset tourist board (visit-dorset.com) has helpfully jumped on the bandwagons of both
Broadchurch and Far from the Madding Crowd. To tie in with the film release, it has updated the
Hardy Trail leaflet (bit.ly/HardyDorset). It features picturesque Sherborne in the north-west, with its
clutch of medieval buildings and abbey, and the glorious Elizabethan manor, Mapperton House
(01308 862 645; mapperton.com; entry £6) near Beaminster – where Carey Mulligan and Tom
Sturridge spent time filming.
There is also a downloadable Broadchurch Trail leaflet (bit.ly/BroadchurchTrail), which will direct
you to filming locations around the county's spectacular coastline – in particular West Bay, with its
soaring cliffs.
In February, when Series 2 aired, Parkdean Holidays (0344 335 3450; parkdeanholidays .co.uk)
experienced a 45 per cent rise in bookings for its West Bay Holiday Park in Bridport, which
features in the programme – the "Broadchurch effect" in action.

25

Of course, Dorset has far more to offer than sights based on works of fiction. Sprawling across an
area of 946 square miles, it's cradled by Devon, Somerset, Wiltshire and Hampshire, with the
English Channel to the south. Three quarters of Dorset's coastline is a Unesco World Heritage Site –
the Jurassic Coast – while more than half of the county is a designated Area of Outstanding Natural
Beauty.

Pag. 2/3

Sessione suppletiva 2015
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
SI96 – ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzo: IT04, EA07 – TURISMO
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE
30

35

Towns sprinkled along the shore include the traditional seaside resort Weymouth, Regency gem
Lyme Regis (for film buffs forever synonymous with The French Lieutenant's Woman), and the
little market town of Bridport.
Inland the clutch of historic towns includes Dorchester (the county town), Wimborne and
Shaftesbury, while the pretty village of Corfe Castle is home to fascinating medieval ruins of the
same name (nationaltrust.org.uk/corfe-castle; admission from £7.72).
Dorset's rolling countryside is threaded with walking trails across chalky downs and through lush
river valleys and ancient woodland. The 630-mile South West Coast Path (southwest
coastpath.com) starts from Poole harbour, while the Rodwell Trail, a two-mile yomp along the old
Weymouth to Portland Railway, is a good option for families.

40

45

Gourmets should be sure to visit the area during May, when the Christchurch Food and Wine
Festival (christchurchfoodfest.co.uk) takes place. Throughout the whole month, many of the town's
cafés, pubs, bars and hotels will be offering special menus, deals and events, while on 9-10 May
there will be food stalls and cooking demonstrations by Levi Roots among others. And from 11-12
July, the Pommery Dorset Seafood Festival (dorset seafood.co.uk) takes place in Weymouth's
historic harbour.
[…]
Getting there
Dorset is a motorway-free zone, criss-crossed by A-roads. If you're travelling by car, the main
M3/A303 route between London and Devon skirts the top of Dorset.

50

55

The closest thing to a "Trans-Dorset Railway" is the Heart of Wessex line (heartofwessex.org.uk),
which runs from Bristol Temple Meads and Bath to Weymouth, calling at the historic villages of
Yetminster and Maiden Newton as well as the county town, Dorchester.
The main rail link from London is the South West Trains (0870 906 6649; southwesttrains.co.uk)
service from Waterloo to Bournemouth, Dorchester and Weymouth; the Waterloo to Exeter train
stops at Sherborne and Axminster (for Lyme Regis). Cross Country Trains (0844 811 0126;
crosscountrytrains.co.uk) runs from Birmingham and various other cities to Bournemouth, via
Reading.
Flybe (0871 700 2000; flybe.com) flies to Bournemouth from Glasgow, Jersey and Manchester.
(738 words)
Lucy Gillmore, The Independent, Friday, 24 April 2015
http://www.independent.co.uk/travel/uk/dorsets-cultural-landscape-hardy-country-and-broadchurchbreaks-10200623.html downloaded on 24 April 2015

Pag. 3/3

Sessione suppletiva 2015
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
SI96 – ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzo: IT04, EA07 – TURISMO
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE

Answer the following questions using your own words.
1.

Why is Dorset receiving much attention as a tourist destination?

2.

How has “Broadchurch” helped Dorset?

3.

How is Dorset related to “Far from the Madding Crowd”?

4.

What has the Dorset Tourist Board done?

5.

What is meant by the “Broadchurch effect in action”?

6.

What is the “Jurassic Coast”?

7.

What is Lyme Regis famous for?

8.

What can tourists do in Dorset?

9.

Who are “gourmets” and why are they recommended to visit Dorset in May?

10. How can tourists get to Dorset?

PART 2: Writing
Choose one of the following questions.
Number your answer clearly to show which question you have attempted.
Either
1.

Think of the setting of an Italian book/film you like and write an itinerary to be published in a
travel brochure.

Or
2.

Have you ever visited a tourist attraction because of its links with a literary work or film? Write
about such experience in a review for a travel blog.

___________________________
Durata massima della prova: 6 ore.
È consentito l’uso dei dizionari monolingue e bilingue.
Non è consentito lasciare l’Istituto prima che siano trascorse 3 ore dalla dettatura del tema.

