Pag. 1/3

Sessione suppletiva 2018
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
I028 – ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzi: IT04 – TURISMO, EA07 – ESABAC, EA27 – ESABAC TECHNO
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE

PART 1: Reading Comprehension
An ideal winter day out: discovering hidden depths at a Canal & River Trust open day
In the diffusing winter sunlight over the Trent and Mersey canal, you can take a stroll down the
towpath to the Derwent lock. Finished in 1777, this is the oldest canal in the country – and in years
gone by, freight-carrying boats relied on the lock to shift between the canal’s different water levels.
These days, it’s mainly used by people living on barges, or holidaymakers taking pleasure trips.
5

The lock is part of the 2,000-mile network of canals and rivers looked after by the Canal & River
Trust. Every 20 years or so, the lock gates are changed. The Trust also takes this opportunity to
remove rubbish from the bottom of the lock, restore brickwork and tackle hard-to-reach vegetation.
In December last year, the Trust drained Derwent lock completely, as part of its maintenance – and
decided to open up the canal to the public.

10

The Guardian joined the Canal & River Trust for the Derwent lock open day. Dotted along the path
to the lock are hidden Santas, each bearing a fact about the canal. Children eagerly pore over them,
hoping to decipher their clues to earn prizes. Standing before the lock is an enormous shire horse,
weighing a tonne and decked out in traditional finery, waiting to pull a barge down the canal. The
towpath is a peaceful hubbub of local residents strolling along the dewy grass, running their fingers
along vintage boats painted in canal roses. Beyond the lock are two experienced boating instructors,
waiting to take local residents on free trips.

15

The emptied lock feels vast, chilly and cavernous; so distinct from towpath level that it almost seems
to have its own microclimate. Ben Beadman, one of the charity’s site supervisors, spends his time on
the damp concrete floor, working on the masonry stone.
20

“I love working on the lock,” he says. “It’s nice to get things back to how they should be – restored.
I’m building something for the community. It’s nice to contribute to that, to do that work and know
you’ve done it.”

25

The purpose of the open day is to acquaint local residents with the inner workings of the canal, and
its impact on the local economy and leisure activities. There are 250 miles of waterways in the east
Midlands; it’s home to the river Trent and the river Soar, with various canals dotted around.
“Everything was transported along the canals: wheat, coal, night soil ... even stones for the Houses of
Parliament,” says Sean McGinley, the waterways manager for the east Midlands. […]

30

Most of the boat owners and volunteers at the open day are fully aware of how important it is to
maintain the locks in good working order. “It’s really important that the canals are preserved for
people like us,” says Andrew, a boat owner who has come to the bottom of the lock to observe the
brickwork. “It’s our livelihood. This canal is a monument, but it’s important to keep it alive too – it
shouldn’t become a static exhibit.”
Many remember a time when there was little investment in Britain’s canal system, and are grateful
for the change. “Without the Trust, I wouldn’t have anywhere to live!” laughs Andrew.

Pag. 2/3

Sessione suppletiva 2018
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
I028 – ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzi: IT04 – TURISMO, EA07 – ESABAC, EA27 – ESABAC TECHNO
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE

35

40

But the work of the charity is also about building community. En route to the lock are lots of friendly
volunteers, who dedicate their own time to maintaining the canal and helping local residents take full
advantage of the waterways. “During the day we help boaters who are coming in and leaving,” says
Richard Bottrell, a volunteer lock keeper. “We advise them on carrying an anchor and things like that.
We give them a lot of advice on how to handle boats, particularly if they’re hired boats for
holidaymakers. I like volunteering because I like to meet people.”
And meet people they do. Volunteering has given local residents and boat owners a chance to become
part of the Trust’s infrastructure, and influence its work, meeting like-minded people in the process.
“With the Trust, I feel like we’re in it together; we’re preserving the heritage together. There are
aspects of it we’re all working on. It’s like it’s our canal,” says Bottrell.

45

Part of the purpose of the open day is to raise awareness of the charity’s work; so the public have a
chance to be aware and involved. There’s a sense that Britain’s canal networks deserve to be seen as
an important part of our heritage and landscape, on a par with the forests. [...]
[744 words]
Available online:
https://www.theguardian.com/discover-canal-river-trust/2018/jan/05/an-ideal-winter-day-out-discovering-hiddendepths-at-a-canal-river-trust-open-day
Accessed on 22 January 2018

Refer to the text to answer the following questions. Use complete sentences and your own words.
1. Which “hidden depths” is the writer referring to in the title?
2. What is the Canal & River Trust and what does it do?
3. Why is its work so important for many people? Give at least two reasons.
4. What can people do at the Derwent Lock open day?
5. Why does the charity organize an open day? Mention at least two reasons.
6. Why is Ben Beadman satisfied with his work?
7. Why is the canal considered “a monument”? (Line 31)
8. How has the canal changed over the course of time?
9. To what extent have volunteers become part of the Trust’s infrastructure?
10. What is the purpose of this article?

Pag. 3/3

Sessione suppletiva 2018
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
I028 – ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzi: IT04 – TURISMO, EA07 – ESABAC, EA27 – ESABAC TECHNO
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE

PART 2: Writing
Choose either A or B. Clearly mark your choice on your exam paper by writing “A” or “B”
A. You work for a travel agency. Write a 300-word article for your e-newsletter to present and
promote a one-day winter outing for families with young children.
Or
B. You work for a travel agency: You have received an e-mail enquiring about a skiing trip to the
Dolomites you promote. Write the reply giving all the necessary details. Write about 300 words.

____________________________
Durata massima della prova: 6 ore.
È consentito soltanto l’uso dei dizionari monolingue e bilingue.
Non è consentito lasciare l’Istituto prima che siano trascorse 3 ore dalla dettatura del tema.

