Pag. 1/3

Sessione suppletiva 2018
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
RIM1 – ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzi: ITRI, EA06, EA26 – AMMINISTRAZIONE FINANZA E MARKETING
ARTICOLAZIONE RELAZIONI INTERNAZIONALI PER IL MARKETING
ITIR – ISTITUTO ECONOMICO INTERNAZIONALE QUADRIENNALE
ARTICOLAZIONE RELAZIONI INTERNAZIONALI PER IL MARKETING
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE
PART 1: Reading Comprehension

Marketing your services: go modern or keep it traditional?
When you start a business these days, there's a lot of pressure to have an online presence. For hightech businesses, that makes a lot of sense. But does an independent hairdresser or window cleaner
really need a large Twitter following and a website with all the bells and whistles?
5

Sometimes it's best to have the courage to follow your own path. For some small businesses, that
might mean steering clear of digital marketing and investing in the tried-and-tested methods of
advertising, from handing out flyers to placing a notice in the post office. Here's a look at the
advantages and disadvantages of online and offline marketing.
When the old ways are the best

10

15

20

It's worth remembering that 10% of households in the UK still don't have internet access. But the
notice board in the local post office, shop or pub is accessible to everyone. It's also hard to beat
when it comes to targeting your advertising locally. Pick your place – a community centre with an
older demographic is a good place to advertise gardening. A leisure centre where busy professionals
hang out may be better for dog walking services.
It pays to look professional, so think about what your ad looks like. An online print company can
produce a batch of business cards for a reasonable cost. Supermarkets often have a business card
dispenser behind the checkouts – speak to customer services about displaying yours.
If your business is offline, then your advertising probably should be too. Nothing is as effective at
getting people through the door of your business as newspaper inserts. A MORI survey found that
82% of people said they had taken action after seeing a newspaper insert. By contrast, fewer than
1% of people reading newspapers online click the digital ads.
Print advertising may also be more memorable. A Norwegian study found that readers had better
recall of things that they had seen in print rather than on screen. So if you want to make a real
impression, paper may be the best choice.

Pag. 2/3

Sessione suppletiva 2018
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
Easy ways into modern marketing
25

The internet offers access to a vast audience and there are plenty of easy and cheap ways for small
businesses to engage. You can be up and running in moments, with no waiting for print deadlines,
and you'll often be able to get live feedback on how many people see your ad and respond.

30

Online classified platform, Gumtree, brings the small ad up to date. It has a services page, where
small businesses are listed by type and geographical region, and claims to reach 33% of the UK
population. Local newspapers are also able to combine a hard copy advert with an online one.

35

Know your demographic. Do you have a cutting-edge hairdressing salon, or are your customers
after a weekly shampoo and set? If the latter, you can still get away with the post office noticeboard.
If you’re aiming for a younger audience, try an online platform. Treatwell is a beauty bookings
platform that connects customers and salons. Customers can search salons by area and afterwards
can review their experience, TripAdvisor-style.
For a free and easy introduction to online marketing, set up a business page on Facebook. Ask your
social Facebook friends to like and share your new page to give your network a head start. You can
then use Facebook's advertising tools to target your message: want to find the pet owners in your
area? You can.

40

45

One of the many advantages of being a small local business is knowing your demographic. Chat to
a cross-section of your regular and new customers: would they and their friends be more likely to
pick up a flyer or log into Gumtree?
However, as none of these marketing methods cost a fortune, what have you got to lose by trying a
new approach? Ditch Twitter for a week and try a retro ad in the post office. Spend a rainy Sunday
setting up a Facebook page for your business. It could open up a whole new (or old) world.
[679 words]
Adapted from
https://www.axa.co.uk/insurance/business/business-guardian-angel/traditional-vs-modern-marketing-methods/
Available on/line, accessed 10 03 2018

Refer to the text to answer the following questions. Use complete sentences and your own
words.
1. What type of businesses might benefit from “a large Twitter following and a website”? (Line 3)
2. Should small businesses avoid digital marketing? Why / why not?
3. Where can you advertise your services “offline”? Find four examples in the text.
4. The article says it is important to look professional: what does it suggest?
5. Which is more effective, printed information or information on-screen? Justify your answer by
referring to the text.
6. What is Gumtree?
7. What services does Gumtree offer to small businesses?
8. What is meant by the phrase “your demographic”? (Line 40)
9. How can you, informally, find out more about “your demographic”?
10. What are the advantages of using these low-tech ways of advertising?

Pag. 3/3

Sessione suppletiva 2018
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
PART 2: Writing
Choose either A or B. Clearly mark your choices on the exam paper by writing “A” or “B”.
A. Friends have asked you for advice about how best to advertise a small retail activity they are
setting up. Choose the activity, where it will be located in and who the potential clients will be.
Write them a short email of about 250 words offering advice about the do’s and don’ts of
reaching their potential clients.
Or
B. Have you, or someone you know, ever bought anything online? Discuss the pros and cons of
digital marketing from the point of view of the customer / client in an essay of about 250 words.

____________________________
Durata massima della prova: 6 ore.
È consentito soltanto l’uso dei dizionari monolingue e bilingue.
Non è consentito lasciare l’Istituto prima che siano trascorse 3 ore dalla dettatura del tema.

