Pag. 1/7

Sessione ordinaria 2017
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
INGL - ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzi: EA12 - ESABAC - LINGUISTICO INTERNAZIONALE FRANCESE
LIA4 - LINGUISTICO OPZIONE INTERNAZIONALE SPAGNOLA
LIB4 - LINGUISTICO OPZIONE INTERNAZIONALE TEDESCA
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE
I
In un articolo pubblicato nel 2014 su “le narrazioni di Milano”, lo scrittore italiano Giorgio Vasta ha
scritto: “Ogni spazio è neutro, ogni origine è irrilevante. Poi arriva la scrittura che conferendo allo
spazio una forma linguistica altera la neutralità, contrasta l’irrilevanza. A quel punto, quando lo spazio
diventa oggetto di una narrazione, ciò che era neutro diventa emblematico (se non sintomatico), ciò
che era irrilevante si fa significativo”.
Individua uno o più ‘luoghi della letteratura’ contenuti in opere appartenenti alla produzione letteraria
in una delle lingue straniere da te studiate e commenta le parole di Vasta a partire dalle tue riflessioni
su come tali luoghi siano divenuti “emblematici” all’interno delle opere scelte.
II
Nel numero della rivista italiana di geopolitica Limes del 21/12/2016, Lucio Caracciolo scrive su
“Perché non serve la Fortezza Europa” nella sua rubrica denominata “Il Punto”: “Oggi che il processo
di disintegrazione del progetto comunitario è in fase acuta, e mentre la deglobalizzazione del pianeta,
fra protezionismi e particolarismi, avanza a passo veloce, la tentazione di chiuderci al mondo per
proteggerci dal terrorismo è imperdonabile”.
Esprimi le tue considerazioni al riguardo, riflettendo anche sulle fasi storiche della costruzione del
“progetto comunitario” europeo e sulle criticità che questo progetto sembra incontrare oggigiorno.
III
Lo slogan scelto per l’edizione 2017 della Giornata Mondiale della Sicurezza in Rete (Safer Internet
Day), che si tiene ogni anno nel mese di febbraio, è stato: Be the change: unite for a better internet,
mentre per l’edizione 2016, lo slogan era Play your part for a better internet.
Una recente indagine condotta in Italia dalla società di ricerche di mercato IPSOS per l’organizzazione
umanitaria Save the Children in occasione del Safer Internet Day 2017 dimostra che, non solo i
ragazzi, ma anche moltissimi adulti, sono quasi del tutto inconsapevoli riguardo alle informazioni che
vengono raccolte su di loro e le loro attività sul web e a come queste informazioni vengono utilizzate.
Esprimi le tue considerazioni nel merito, riflettendo anche su ciò che gli slogans ti invitano a fare.

____________________________
Durata massima della prova: 6 ore.
È consentito soltanto l’uso dei dizionari monolingue e bilingue.
Il candidato è tenuto a svolgere, nella lingua straniera indicata, la prova di composizione su uno dei temi su indicati,
oppure la prova di comprensione e produzione su uno dei testi proposti qui allegati.
Non è consentito lasciare l’Istituto prima che siano trascorse 3 ore dalla dettatura del tema.

Pag. 2/7

Sessione ordinaria 2017
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
INGL - ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
TESTO LETTERARIO – LINGUA INGLESE
(comprensione e produzione in lingua straniera)
MY FINANCIAL CAREER

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

When I go into a bank I get rattled. The clerks rattle me; the wickets rattle me; the sight of the money
rattles me; everything rattles me. The moment I cross the threshold of a bank and attempt to transact
business there, I become an irresponsible idiot. I knew this beforehand, but my salary had been raised
to fifty dollars a month and I felt that the bank was the only place for it.
So I shambled in and looked timidly round at the clerks. I had an idea that a person about to open an
account must needs consult the manager.
I went up to a wicket marked "Accountant." The accountant was a tall, cool devil. The very sight of
him rattled me. My voice was sepulchral.
"Can I see the manager?" I said, and added solemnly, "alone." I don't know why I said "alone."
"Certainly," said the accountant, and fetched him. […]
The manager looked at me in some alarm. He felt that I had an awful secret to reveal.
"Come in here," he said, and led the way to a private room. He turned the key in the lock. "We are safe
from interruption here," he said; "sit down."
We both sat down and looked at each other. I found no voice to speak.
"You are one of Pinkerton's men, I presume," he said.
He had gathered from my mysterious manner that I was a detective. I knew what he was thinking, and
it made me worse.
"No, not from Pinkerton's," I said, seeming to imply that I came from a rival agency. "To tell the
truth," I went on, as if I had been prompted to lie about it, "I am not a detective at all. I have come to
open an account. I intend to keep all my money in this bank."
The manager looked relieved but still serious; he concluded now that I was a son of Baron Rothschild
or a young Gould.
"A large account, I suppose," he said.
"Fairly large," I whispered. "I propose to deposit fifty-six dollars now and fifty dollars a month
regularly."
The manager got up and opened the door. He called to the accountant.
"Mr. Montgomery," he said unkindly loud, "this gentleman is opening an account, he will deposit fiftysix dollars. Good morning." […]
I went up to the accountant's wicket and poked the ball of money at him with a quick convulsive
movement as if I were doing a conjuring trick. […]
He took the money and gave it to another clerk.
He made me write the sum on a slip and sign my name in a book. I no longer knew what I was doing.
The bank swam before my eyes.
"Is it deposited?" I asked in a hollow, vibrating voice.
"It is," said the accountant.
"Then I want to draw a cheque."

Pag. 3/7

Sessione ordinaria 2017
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
INGL - ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
TESTO LETTERARIO – LINGUA INGLESE
(comprensione e produzione in lingua straniera)

40

45

50

55

60

My idea was to draw out six dollars of it for present use. Someone gave me a chequebook through a
wicket and someone else began telling me how to write it out. The people in the bank had the
impression that I was an invalid millionaire. I wrote something on the cheque and thrust it in at the
clerk. He looked at it.
"What! are you drawing it all out again?" he asked in surprise. Then I realized that I had written fiftysix instead of six. I was too far gone to reason now. I had a feeling that it was impossible to explain the
thing. All the clerks had stopped writing to look at me.
Reckless with misery, I made a plunge.
"Yes, the whole thing."
"You withdraw your money from the bank?"
"Every cent of it."
"Are you not going to deposit any more?" said the clerk, astonished.
"Never."
An idiot hope struck me that they might think something had insulted me while I was writing the
cheque and that I had changed my mind. I made a wretched attempt to look like a man with a fearfully
quick temper.
The clerk prepared to pay the money.
"How will you have it?" he said.
"What?"
"How will you have it?"
"Oh"—I caught his meaning and answered without even trying to think—"in fifties."
He gave me a fifty-dollar bill.
"And the six?" he asked dryly.
"In sixes," I said.
He gave it me and I rushed out.
As the big door swung behind me I caught the echo of a roar of laughter that went up to the ceiling of
the bank. Since then I bank no more. I keep my money in cash in my trousers pocket and my savings
in silver dollars in a sock.
Abridged from: Stephen Leacock, “My Financial Career”,
First published in Literary Lapses (1910).
Republished in My Financial Career and Other Follies
Toronto, New Canadian Library, 1993, pgs. 1-4
Also available online: https://americanliterature.com/author/stephen-leacock/short-story/my-financial-career

Pag. 4/7

Sessione ordinaria 2017
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
INGL - ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
TESTO LETTERARIO – LINGUA INGLESE
(comprensione e produzione in lingua straniera)
COMPREHENSION
Answer the following questions. Use complete sentences.
1. What did the narrator know about himself before he went into the bank?
2. Who did he think he needed to consult when he went to the bank and why?
3. The narrator asked to see this person “alone”. What reaction did this create in this person?
4. What is Pinkerton’s?
5. Provide 2 details to show how large an account the narrator intended to open.
6. What did the narrator ask to do after depositing his money?
7. Why did all the clerks stop writing to look at him?
8. Why was there a “roar of laughter” as the narrator left the bank?

Summarize the content of the story in about 120 words.
COMPOSITION
The narrator’s “financial career” in the story turned out to be somewhat short-lived. However, financial
literacy has become very important in today’s world and the first OECD PISA assessments on financial
literacy in the current decade have shown that many young people are confused by money matters.
Think about your own experiences with handling money, spending and savings and write a composition
of about 300 words to self-assess your own “financial career” and your ability to deal with money
matters.

____________________________
Durata massima della prova: 6 ore.
È consentito soltanto l’uso dei dizionari monolingue e bilingue.
Non è consentito lasciare l’Istituto prima che siano trascorse 3 ore dalla dettatura del tema.

Pag. 5/7

Sessione ordinaria 2017
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
INGL - ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
TESTO DI ATTUALITÀ – LINGUA INGLESE
(comprensione e produzione in lingua straniera)
100 Women: The English girls' school reborn in a Nairobi slum
In 2005 Judy Webb closed down the private girls' school her family had run in the English countryside
for nearly 60 years. As she packed away a stack of unused school uniforms, she had no idea that a
decade later they would be worn by a class of Kenyan children in a new school, named after hers, in
one of the poorest parts of Nairobi.

5

10

15

20

25

The story of the two schools begins in November 2013 when the BBC World Service launched its first
list of 100 inspiring and influential women around the world. As the first female commander of an allmale field force unit in the British army, Judy Webb was one of the women on the list.
On top of her trail-blazing military career, she had spent nearly 20 years running Rossholme Girls'
School in southern England, before turning it into a thriving country guest house business.
The BBC invited all the 100 Women of 2013 to a conference in London, which is where Judy met
another name on the list—a Kenyan student called Joyce Aruga.
Although they were from different generations, different countries and with very different life
experiences, the two women hit it off immediately.
"She was resilient, positive and cheerful," Judy remembers "and she was a very good observer".
Joyce, who was 27 at the time, had a back story quite as remarkable as Judy's.
The youngest of 11 children, she was born into a poor family on the remote Mageta Island in Lake
Victoria in 1986—the same year Judy Webb took over running Rossholme School.
"None of my elder brothers and sisters got an education," she says. "My parents couldn't afford to pay
the school fees."
At the age of 14 she was forced to become the third wife of a much older man, but—determined to get
an education—she ran away from her husband.
With the help of a children's charity she got a place at secondary school, and funded her studies working
as a maid.
By the time Joyce and Judy met in London, Joyce was one year into a teacher training degree at the
Kenyan Methodist University in Nairobi—helped by a sponsor from a church in the United States.
"I couldn't believe that I, Joyce a village girl, was going to get on a plane and go to London," she
remembers. "I had only seen planes in drawings. How will I board this thing that flies in the air?"
After the conference Joyce spent the weekend in Somerset with Judy and her family. She told them
about her dream of one day setting up her own school in Kenya.
Judy asked Joyce if she could make use of the uniforms left over from Rossholme school.
"She tried one on herself," Judy remembers. "She liked it so much she wanted to wear it on the flight
home!"

Pag. 6/7

Sessione ordinaria 2017
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
INGL - ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
TESTO DI ATTUALITÀ – LINGUA INGLESE
(comprensione e produzione in lingua straniera)

30

35

40

45

For the next three years the two women kept in touch by email, and in July Joyce wrote to say that not
only had she successfully graduated with a teaching degree, but she had also opened up a small dayschool in Mathere, a vast slum on the edge of Nairobi.
Another email followed showing a tiny group of tiny children, all proudly wearing Judy's blue and
yellow school uniforms, and standing in front of the blue painted gates of their new school—the
Rossholme Education Centre.
Joyce is starting small, with 10 pupils aged from 8 months to four years old.
"I found them by walking door to door, looking for kids who should have been in pre-school," she says.
"When I asked their parents why they weren't in school, they said they couldn't afford the fees."
Joyce has been teaching her first class for free, but she's fundraising to expand, and hopes to be able to
provide primary and secondary education for up to 100 disadvantaged children over the next two years.
"Because of the hardship I went through in life, I made a promise to myself that I would always help the
poor and vulnerable," says Joyce. "I try to give some hope to those who have lost it."
Joyce says that taking part in the BBC's 100 Women series helped her expand her horizons.
"I learned there are challenges everywhere," she says. "It doesn't matter what we have gone through, we
can still stand up and fight for our rights."
Back in Somerset, Judy has also started fundraising, hoping people who remember Rossholme Girls
School, will be inspired to support the new Rossholme Education Centre in Nairobi. […]
Jenny Norton, BBC News,
Posted: December 20, 2016
Available online:
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-38335861
Accessed on 3 February 2017.

COMPREHENSION
Answer the following questions. Use complete sentences.
1. What different kinds of work was Judy Webb engaged in when she met Joyce Aruga?
2. Where and on what occasion did the two women meet?
3. What did Joyce’s parents oblige her to do?
4. Provide 2 details showing Joyce’s determination to get an education.
5. What was Joyce’s dream and how did Judy immediately help her?
6. What has Joyce been able to set up in her home country and who is it for?
7. What promise did Joyce make to herself?
8. How has Judy been supporting Joyce in her endeavour?

Pag. 7/7

Sessione ordinaria 2017
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
INGL - ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
TESTO DI ATTUALITÀ – LINGUA INGLESE
(comprensione e produzione in lingua straniera)
Summarize the content of the passage in about 120 words.
COMPOSITION:
The story shows how taking advantage of a window of opportunity can create important changes not
only in the lives of those who were directly involved but also in the lives of others. Think about a lifechanging opportunity you yourself have experienced or are familiar with. Reflect on its consequences
and what might have happened instead if that opportunity had not materialised. Present the situation
together with your reflections in a composition of about 300 words.

________________________
Durata massima della prova: 6 ore.
È consentito soltanto l’uso dei dizionari monolingue e bilingue.
Non è consentito lasciare l’Istituto prima che siano trascorse 3 ore dalla dettatura del tema.

