Pag. 1/3

Sessione suppletiva 2016
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
M460 – ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzi: ITRI, EA06 – AMMINISTRAZIONE, FINANZA E MARKETING
ARTICOLAZIONE RELAZIONI INTERNAZIONALI PER IL MARKETING
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE
PART 1: Reading Comprehension
AdWords Post-Campaign Report: London Children’s Museum
Community Impact of the London Children’s Museum: Since 1975, the London Children’s
Museum has been enriching the lives of children and families in London and surrounding
communities. With nine permanent exhibits that provide guests with an interactive learning
experience, children can indulge in a stimulating learning experience focused on the areas of: history
and heritage, science, social relationships, art, and culture. Through on-going educational programs
like community groups, camps, and educational field trips, the London Children’s Museum continues
to make an impact on the London community and provide a unique experience that cannot be
replicated.
Designing AdWords Campaign to Meet Client’s Goals: At the start of the campaign, the Children’s
Museum specified that they would like to focus on increasing March Break and summer camp signups, increase the number of birthday party bookings, encourage people to purchase family
membership, and increase foot traffic. As a group, we designed the AdWords campaign to meet these
goals, keeping in mind the ways we could drive greater site traffic and increase overall awareness in
the community. To do this, we developed campaigns for each objective: Birthday Parties, Camps,
Membership, and General Brand. Within each of these campaigns, we researched the types of phrases
people use to search and refer to each topic and implemented them as ad groups and keywords. In
developing our strategy, we also tracked conversions in the General Brand campaign, specifically:
views to the hours & admissions page, time on site greater than 2 minutes, and visits with more than
3 pageviews. By achieving a very high conversion rate, we were able to drive qualified traffic to the
site and encourage people to take actions which were in line with our client’s objectives.
Campaign Summary in Less Than 100 Words: We were able to surpass all of our primary goals,
achieving 4,400 impressions, 657 clicks, a CTR of 14.75% across all campaigns, and an average CPC
of $0.30. Google Analytics data suggests that 89% of all AdWords traffic during the 3 weeks was
attributed to the General Brand campaign, with Membership having the poorest performance,
accounting for under 1% of total traffic. Our General Brand campaign was responsible for all
conversions (62.46% CTR). As a result of poor landing pages and low search volumes, our Camps
and Birthday Parties campaigns did not perform as well as we had hoped.
How AdWords Impacted the Client’s Mission: After analyzing the effectiveness of the General
Brand campaign, we discovered that there was an increased interest in the museum as a family
destination. This was seen primarily through users’ time on the site and high click-through and
conversion rates. By showcasing the unique offerings of the museum, the AdWords account was able
to generate an increase in foot traffic and persuade people to take action to book parties and enroll
their children in camps. This aligns with the museum’s mission of providing interactive and
educational experiences for children. By increasing brand awareness and driving greater engagement,
the museum is able to stay true to their mission and offer unique experiences to more families.

Pag. 2/3

Sessione suppletiva 2016
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
M460 – ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzi: ITRI, EA06 – AMMINISTRAZIONE, FINANZA E MARKETING
ARTICOLAZIONE RELAZIONI INTERNAZIONALI PER IL MARKETING
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE
Future Recommendations for the Client: In the future, we recommend that the London Children’s
Museum continue to invest in and make use of AdWords campaigns. Through analyzing the General
Brand campaign, our group was able to determine that brand awareness should in fact be a focus for
the museum. It will also be important to advertise specific areas of the organization, including
birthday parties and camps, but these should be run strategically throughout the year rather than on
an on-going basis due to high costs. We recommend the client complete their new website and design
landing pages that can be used alongside AdWords. These pages should include specific content, calls
to action, and offer a positive user experience. After evaluating the success of the campaign over the
past three weeks, we recommend that the museum continue to develop AdWords campaigns and
establish conversion tracking for bookings once the new site is launched. In the future, we also suggest
the client apply for Google Grants as a non-profit in order to receive $10,000 in in-kind advertising
to promote their mission and services to the London community.
[694 words]
https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/www.google.com/it//onlinechallenge/pdfs/2014/7022164718_post.pdf

Refer to the text to answer the following questions. Use complete sentences and your own words.
1.

What impact does the London Children’s Museum have on the community?

2.

What objectives did the Children’s Museum want to achieve through the AdWords campaign?

3.

What strategy did the group develop in order to meet the customer’s requirements?

4.

Which campaigns had the best and the worst performances?

5.

To what extent was the AdWords campaign effective?

6.

What is the mission of the London Children’s Museum?

7.

What advertising campaigns should the London Children’s Museum focus on in the future?

8.

How could the London Children’s Museum improve its website?

9.

How can the Museum get the resources to promote its activities?

10. What is the overall purpose of this text?

Pag. 3/3

Sessione suppletiva 2016
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
M460 – ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzi: ITRI, EA06 – AMMINISTRAZIONE, FINANZA E MARKETING
ARTICOLAZIONE RELAZIONI INTERNAZIONALI PER IL MARKETING
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE

Part 2: WRITING
Choose either A or B. Clearly mark your choice on your exam paper by writing “A” or “B”.
Either
A. You work with an advertising agency which is about to launch a new campaign for one of its
customers. Your manager has asked you to draft the description of the campaign. Write your
proposal including all the relevant information.
Or
B. You work with an advertising agency. Your manager has asked you to write an article for your
newsletter to announce the launching of a new campaign for one of your customers.
Write a 300-word article which includes details of the campaign, its aims and all the relevant
information.

_____________________
Durata massima della prova: 6 ore
E’ consentito soltanto l’uso dei dizionari monolingue e bilingue.
Non è consentito lasciare l’Istituto prima che siano trascorse 3 ore dalla dettatura del tema.

