Pag. 1/6

Sessione ordinaria 2015
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
INGL - ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzi: EA12 - ESABAC - LINGUISTICO INTERNAZIONALE FRANCESE
LIA4 - LINGUISTICO OPZIONE INTERNAZIONALE SPAGNOLA
LIB4 - LINGUISTICO OPZIONE INTERNAZIONALE TEDESCA
LIB5 - LINGUISTICO OPZIONE INTERNAZIONALE TEDESCA
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE

I
Quando un libro ci appassiona, ci facciamo coinvolgere completamente dalla storia e dai suoi
personaggi. Facendo riferimento ai testi letterari da te studiati in una delle lingue straniere,
individua un personaggio che ti ha particolarmente entusiasmato e/o ti ha fatto sognare. Giustifica la
tua scelta evidenziando le caratteristiche fondamentali del personaggio e quali reazioni ha suscitato
in te.
II
Nel suo intervento alla giornata di lavoro su Expo 2015 a Firenze, il Presidente Mattarella ha
sottolineato che il tema centrale prescelto, “L’alimentazione, energia per la vita”, rappresenta una
delle sfide di base per la sopravvivenza del genere umano e ha affermato che l’evento è
un’occasione feconda per ridefinire opzioni su materie come i suoli ed il loro uso, l'acqua,
l'equilibrio ecologico, la ricerca, le relazioni e gli scambi internazionali.
Affronta l’argomento, esponendo la tua opinione riguardo alle misure e agli strumenti da impiegare
per dare al problema della nutrizione soluzioni possibili.
III
In uno dei maggiori festival internazionali di fotografia e arte multimediale tenutosi a Derby, il
fotografo polacco Artur Urbansky ha posto con il suo lavoro una domanda che molti si fanno,
specie da quando si è diffuso l’uso degli smartphone dotati di macchina fotografica, e cioè: “Perché
si sente il bisogno di registrare e preservare un fugace momento di bellezza piuttosto che viverlo?”
Spesso si fotografano scene che sono già state riprodotte migliaia di volte.
Esprimi le tue opinioni sull’argomento evidenziando il rilievo che selfie, fotografie o video hanno
assunto presso i giovani di oggi.

____________________________
Durata massima della prova: 6 ore.
È consentito soltanto l’uso dei dizionari monolingue e bilingue.
Il candidato è tenuto a svolgere, nella lingua straniera indicata, la prova di composizione su uno dei temi suindicati,
oppure la prova di comprensione e produzione su uno dei testi proposti qui allegati.
Non è consentito lasciare l’Istituto prima che siano trascorse 3 ore dalla dettatura del tema.

Pag. 2/6

Sessione ordinaria 2015
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
INGL - ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
TESTO LETTERARIO – LINGUA INGLESE
(comprensione e produzione in lingua straniera)

Mr. Hutton's first emotion when he was summoned from Italy to give evidence at the inquest was
one of indignation. It was a monstrous, a scandalous thing that the police should take such idle,
malicious gossip seriously. When the inquest was over he would bring an action for malicious
prosecution against the Chief Constable; he would sue the Spence woman for slander.
5

The inquest was opened; the astonishing evidence unrolled itself. The experts had examined the
body, and had found traces of arsenic; they were of opinion that the late Mrs. Hutton had died of
arsenic poisoning.
Arsenic poisoning... Emily had died of arsenic poisoning? After that, Mr. Hutton learned with
surprise that there was enough arsenicated insecticide in his greenhouses to poison an army.

10

15

20

It was now, quite suddenly, that he saw it: there was a case against him. Fascinated he watched it
growing, growing, like some monstrous tropical plant. It was enveloping him, surrounding him; he
was lost in a tangled forest.
When was the poison administered? The experts agreed that it must have been swallowed eight
or nine hours before death. About lunch-time? Yes, about lunch-time. Clara, the parlour-maid, was
called. Mrs. Hutton, she remembered, had asked her to go and fetch her medicine. Mr. Hutton had
volunteered to go instead; he had gone alone. Miss Spence — ah, the memory of the storm, the
white aimed face! the horror of it all! — Miss Spence confirmed Clara’s statement, and added that
Mr. Hutton had come back with the medicine already poured out in a wineglass, not in the bottle.
Mr. Hutton’s indignation evaporated. He was dismayed, frightened. It was all too fantastic to be
taken seriously, and yet this nightmare was fact — it was actually happening.
M’Nab had seen them kissing, often. He had taken them for a drive on the day of Mrs. Hutton’s
death. He could see them reflected in the windscreen, sometimes out of the tail of his eye.
The inquest was adjourned. That evening Doris went to bed with a headache. When he went to
her room after dinner, Mr. Hutton found her crying.

25

30

“What’s the matter?” He sat down on the edge of her bed and began to stroke her hair. For a long
time she did not answer, and he went on stroking her hair mechanically, almost unconsciously;
sometimes, even, he bent down and kissed her bare shoulder. He had his own affairs, however, to
think about. What had happened? How was it that the stupid gossip had actually come true? Emily
had died of arsenic poisoning. It was absurd, impossible. The order of things had been broken, and
he was at the mercy of an irresponsibility. What had happened, what was going to happen? He
was interrupted in the midst of his thoughts.
“It’s my fault — it’s my fault!” Doris suddenly sobbed out. “I shouldn’t have loved you; I
oughtn’t to have let you love me. Why was I ever born?”

35

Mr. Hutton didn’t say anything, but looked down in silence at the abject figure of misery lying
on the bed.
“If they do anything to you I shall kill myself.”

Pag. 3/6

Sessione ordinaria 2015
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
INGL - ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
TESTO LETTERARIO – LINGUA INGLESE
(comprensione e produzione in lingua straniera)

She sat up, held him for a moment at arm’s length, and looked at him with a kind of violence, as
though she were never to see him again.
40

45

50

“I love you, I love you, I love you.” She drew him, inert and passive, towards her, clasped him,
pressed herself against him. “I didn’t know you loved me as much as that, Teddy Bear. But why did
you do it — why did you do it?”
Mr. Hutton undid her clasping arms and got up. His face became very red. “You seem to take it for
granted that I murdered my wife,” he said. “It’s really too grotesque. What do you all take me for?
A cinema hero?” He had begun to lose his temper. All the exasperation, all the fear and
bewilderment of the day, was transformed into a violent anger against her. “It’s all such damned
stupidity. Haven’t you any conception of a civilized man’s mentality? Do I look the sort of man
who’d go about slaughtering people? I suppose you imagined I was so insanely in love with you
that I could commit any folly. When will you women understand that one isn’t insanely in love? All
one asks for is a quiet life, which you won’t allow one to have. I don’t know what the devil ever
induced me to marry you. It was all a damned stupid, practical joke. And now you go about saying
I’m a murderer. I won’t stand it.”
Mr. Hutton stamped towards the door. He had said horrible things, he knew - odious things that he
ought speedily to unsay. But he wouldn’t. He closed the door behind him.

Aldous Huxley, The Gioconda Smile, first published in The English Review, August 1921, in The Penguin
Book of English Short Stories, Penguin, London, 1967, pagg. 277-79.
[Also available on line: http://www.online-literature.com/aldous_huxley/4445/]

COMPREHENSION
Answer the following questions:
1. Why is Mr Hutton invited to go back to England?
2. Whose body was examined and why?
3. What is Mr Hutton’s reaction?
4. How are Clara and Miss Spence involved in the case?
5. Who is Doris and why is she crying?
6. What does Doris think of Mr Hutton?

Pag. 4/6

Sessione ordinaria 2015
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
INGL - ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
TESTO LETTERARIO – LINGUA INGLESE
(comprensione e produzione in lingua straniera)

7. How does Mr Hutton feel about it?
8. What are the “odious things” Mr Hutton regrets?
Summarise the content of the passage in about 150 words.

COMPOSITION:
a.

Write a 300-word comment on the text by focusing on the relationship between Mr Hutton and
Doris. Try to link your ideas to your personal experience and/or reading.

Alternatively:
b.

“There was a case against him. Fascinated he watched it growing, growing, like some
monstrous tropical plant. It was enveloping him, surrounding him; he was lost in a tangled
forest.”
Write a 300-word comment on this passage by relating it to current criminal cases and the way
they are dealt with by the media. Refer to your personal experience and/or reading.

____________________________
Durata massima della prova: 6 ore.
È consentito soltanto l’uso dei dizionari monolingue e bilingue.
Non è consentito lasciare l’Istituto prima che siano trascorse 3 ore dalla dettatura del tema.

Pag. 5/6

Sessione ordinaria 2015
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
INGL - ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
TESTO DI ATTUALITÀ – LINGUA INGLESE
(comprensione e produzione in lingua straniera)

The Joy of Less

5

Today, purchasing takes just one click. But consumption used to be rare and difficult. A few
hundred years ago, Americans had limited options when they needed or wanted something, and the
local general store was often the only recourse. Revolution took hold, catalogs promised sewing
machines, buggies, furniture, eyeglasses, pianos – virtually anything in production that could be
sent via post.

10

In 1872, Montgomery Ward printed what’s often considered the first general-merchandise catalog.
Two decades later Sears published its own 500-page version. Both reached millions of Americans.
By the turn of the century, department stores like Marshall Field’s and Macy’s began offering all
those products in one physical location. A new consumerism was emerging, one that offered a
uniquely American idea that you could aspire to a different social class through acquiring.

15

20

25

30

35

The next wave came after World War II, when a new generation of appliances, furniture and
household goods became available. With the advent of plastics, toys became cheap and ubiquitous.
Mr. Potato Head sprouted. Lego built its first bricks. Mattel debuted Barbie. Television blinked into
American homes, and advertisers and marketers discovered subtle and subconscious ways of sweettalking consumers. The idea of planned obsolescence became popular after General Motors
discovered that if it developed a new automobile model each year, it could trigger people into
upgrading when they otherwise wouldn’t. Economists, meanwhile, realized that consumption was
vital for the expanding nation.
“Our enormously productive economy demands that we make consumption our way of life, that we
convert the buying and use of goods into rituals, that we seek our spiritual satisfactions, our ego
satisfactions, in consumption,” wrote economist Victor Lebow in 1955. “We need things consumed,
burned up, worn out, replaced and discarded at an ever increasing pace. We need to have people eat,
drink, dress, ride, live, with ever more complicated and, therefore, constantly more expensive
consumption.”
Lebow’s comments, whether encouraging consumption or merely acknowledging it, illustrate that
by the 1950s, consuming was paramount. The American Dream didn’t just mean a white picket
fence and two kids. It meant a big house and a bunch of stuff to fill it.
Our current phase of overconsumption began about 30 years ago, when Americans began
committing close to all their annual expenditures on non-necessities. It was the beginning of a
gradual decline in the cost of consumer goods, the growth of everyday credit-card use and the rise
of big-box stores and discount retailers that pushed their way into communities nationwide, forcing
down prices and profits for those competing around them.
In the past decade, the cost of cell phones, toys, computers and televisions has plunged, thanks in
part to overseas manufacturing. The rise of “fast fashion”- popularized by the growth of clothing
outlets like Gap, Forever 21 and American Eagle selling $10 T-shirts and $30 jeans – is now driven
by the low-cost imports from H&M and Uniqlo. Today the average U.S. household has about 248
garments and 29 pairs of shoes. It purchases, on average, 64 pieces of clothing and seven pairs of
shoes annually, at a total cost of $ 1,141 a year, or $16 per item.

Pag. 6/6

Sessione ordinaria 2015
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
INGL - ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
TESTO DI ATTUALITÀ – LINGUA INGLESE
(comprensione e produzione in lingua straniera)

“When the question is why do we have so much stuff, one reason is because we can, “ says Annie
Leonard, executive director of the environmental group Greenpeace USA and the creator of The
Story of the Stuff, an animated video about excessive consumerism. “For a huge percentage of this
country, there is no longer an economic obstacle to having the illusion of luxury. It’s just this stuff
is so cheap.”

40

If there’s a fourth wave of overconsumption, it’s led by Amazon. Thanks to the growth of online
shopping and quick purchase tools like “I-Click Ordering”, unnecessary spending is almost
effortless. When stores were the only places to buy something, there were several points at which
shoppers could stop and ask themselves, Do I need this? What will I do with it? Where will it live
when I bring it home? As online shopping outpaces brick-and-mortar growth, many of those
barriers no longer exist.

45

Time, March 23, 2015
COMPREHENSION
Answer the following questions.
1.

Where did Americans use to buy things in the past?

2.

When did the first merchandise catalog come out?

3.

What innovation did department stores represent?

4.

What triggered consumerism after World War II?

5.

According to Lebow what did the economy need?

6.

What favored overconsumption?

7.

Why do Americans buy a lot of garments and shoes?

8.

What main change has online shopping introduced?

Summarize the content of the passage in about 150 words.
COMPOSITION:
Do you like shopping? Do you often buy things you don’t need? What do you think of
consumerism? Discuss you view on the topic in a 300-word essay.

________________________
Durata massima della prova: 6 ore.
È consentito soltanto l’uso dei dizionari monolingue e bilingue.
Non è consentito lasciare l’Istituto prima che siano trascorse 3 ore dalla dettatura del tema.

