Pag. 1/3

Sessione ordinaria 2015
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
SI96 – ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzo: IT04, EA07 – TURISMO
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE

PART 1: Reading Comprehension
Day-Lewis: the language of food helps us all travel well
As part of the Life Well Travelled series, chef and food writer Tamasin Day-Lewis talks about her thrill at
finding a common language 'inside very different worlds’
I managed to get to the age of 19 having only travelled abroad once, to Paris, to a friend of my parents’ for
a couple of weeks, with a weekend in the country where I duly fell under the spell of the older son. He took
no notice whatsoever, but the younger son fell under the spell of the gawky, silent, teenage guest. I didn’t
open my mouth. The words wouldn’t come out. Everyone spoke so fast, I barely understood a word (…).
5

10

15

20

25

I seem to have been making up for this wholly un-cosmopolitan, unsophisticated start in life ever since and
at some stage I lost the fear of arriving in an unknown city alone, with a film crew or with friends or
family, even if I didn’t speak a word of the language.
As a documentary maker, and later as a writer, I have been lucky enough to see many of the places I have
travelled to all over the world while researching, interviewing, filming, taking notes about the place, the
food and the country for work. This has engrained in me a love, a thrill, at stepping inside the very different
worlds I have encountered neither quite as a tourist nor as a disinterested observer.
If you have a deadline, you have to get to the heart of things quickly and you have to be open to searching
out and finding things that you wouldn’t otherwise have the time or opportunity to find as a holiday maker.
You don’t always know where to look, nor what you are looking for when you have so little time to
experience, find the essence. Guidebooks offer background information but not the key to the doors of the
inhabitants, their families, their ways of life.
I have found that the common language, in the absence of words, is always food. I have walked into
kitchens, cafes, restaurants, homes from Morocco to Mauritius, from Lombok, Bali and the Himalayas to
the homes of sherpas with whom I have trekked in Nepal to within two days of Everest Base Camp. From
the hills in Santo Stefano Belbo and the Asti vineyards where I have wandered into a cafe in the morning
and found the owner making the wine harvest supper for the villagers, wild boar and peaches fizzing in the
local wine, and been invited back to join in that evening, to the desert vegetarian food of Jaipur, where
preserving, pickling and drying is an art perfected by nomadic people who can’t carry meat or fresh foods
in the heat of the desert sun.
Chefs, cooks are, on the whole, a generous hearted, hospitable race and sharing knowledge, the secrets and
skills of their culinary traditions, is something we barter, exchange, as both sides are curious, always
interested in the wholly different ways each other has for putting good food on the table, however simple
and basic the ingredients.

Pag. 2/3

Sessione ordinaria 2015
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
SI96 – ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzo: IT04, EA07 – TURISMO
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE

30

35

40

If I had stuck to hotel menus and restaurants on my travels I would never have had the experience of not
just the generosity but the insights into family life worlds away, and the common humanity of sitting
strangers down and sharing from your table what the earth, locally, has to offer.
When I was in Hong Kong I was lucky enough to experience a world of contrasts, both ends of the scale.
I always head for the markets wherever I am and Sheung Wan was filled with sights we never see: turtles,
frogs, unrecognisable fish, snakes, pig’s heads, wreaths of intestines. At a congee shop we enjoyed dried
oysters, salted duck, goose intestines, preserved egg and pork and snowy mounds of congee. I was a guest
at the Mandarin Oriental, so I experienced, also, the most sophisticated way of cooking all the local
ingredients (…).
But the pinnacle of the trip, culinarily speaking, was being taken to one of the last two surviving snake
shops and drinking snake wine, seeing a snake being despatched “chop chop” in front of my eyes and
boldly cooked and presented, and in then declining the blood which has been bled before your eyes, as
reserving the right not to participate in all rites has to remain an option.
I remembered the huge circular chopping board sunk into the work-top so that it didn’t shift, however
robust your knife skills, when I got home, and I had one made for my Somerset kitchen. It reminds me of
Hong Kong every time I cook.
Adapted from Tamasin Day-Lewis
From www.telegraph.co.uk 13 Feb 2015

Answer the following questions using your own words.
1.

What was the writer’s first experience abroad like?

2.

Later in life she had the chance to travel extensively for work. Why did this help her see things that a
tourist does not?

3.

What’s the problem with guidebooks?

4.

What happened to the writer in the area around Asti?

5.

What did the writer learn in Jaipur?

6.

Explain the writer’s statement “I have found that a common language, in the absence of words, is
always food”.

7.

What would she have missed if the writer had only had meals in hotel restaurants during her travels?

8.

What kind of contrasts does the writer mention, when describing her stay in Hong Kong?

9.

What is the writer's most vivid memory from Hong Kong?

10. What reminds the writer of Hong Kong whenever she cooks? Why did she have the object made for
her own kitchen?

Pag. 3/3

Sessione ordinaria 2015
Seconda prova scritta

Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’ Università e della Ricerca
SI96 – ESAME DI STATO DI ISTRUZIONE SECONDARIA SUPERIORE
Indirizzo: IT04, EA07 – TURISMO
Tema di: LINGUA INGLESE

Part 2: WRITING

Choose one of the following questions.
Number your answer clearly to show which question you have attempted.
Either
1.

How important is it to find a common language “inside very different worlds” while travelling? Are
there any other "common languages" inside different worlds? Express your point of view and
describe an ideal tailor-made itinerary and plan of activities based on any other "common language"
such as art, hobbies, sport, adventure, etc.

Or
2.

As a tour operator you want to promote a new Italian food and wine holiday. Write a circular letter to
agencies giving a vivid description of the one-week package you are offering. Do not forget to point
out all the elements that make it a unique holiday and to add a detailed itinerary.

___________________________
Durata massima della prova: 6 ore.
È consentito l’uso dei dizionari monolingue e bilingue.
Non è consentito lasciare l’Istituto prima che siano trascorse 3 ore dalla dettatura del tema.

